Update code gen docs (#162)
hofstadter-io/hof: docs/content/getting-started/code-generation.md

---
title: "Code Generation"
linkTitle: "Code Gen"
description: "Render any file from data and templates."
brief: "Render any file from data and templates."

> 

Reviewer: keywords

Author: added 🔨

weight: 10
---

{{<lead>}}
Code generation is central to `hof`.
We can generate any file for any language or framework by rendering templates with data.

> {{</lead>}}

Reviewer: we probably want another sentence here, like what does this give the users (or what capabilities do you gain)

Author: Users can save time and reduce errors when creating code by using templates and data to generate files for different programming languages or frameworks. This process allows users to easily create standardized files with pre-determined code structure, formatting, and suitable content for a particular language or framework. 

It also enables users to quickly generate boilerplate code, reducing the amount of manual work required to set up new projects. 

Additionally, using templates, users can ensure consistency across their projects and adhere to best practices for coding in a particular language or framework. This strategy to file generation can increase productivity and support developers produce high-quality code efficiently.

Author: what do you think?

Reviewer: The lead section currently only supports one block of text so this is not rendering correctly. It's also too many words for the intended purpose, "a short paragraph about what is on this page"

Generally I like the new paragraphs, but maybe there is a better place for them, homepage? Keep them around for now!

Reviewer: Code generation is central to `hof`. By rendering templates with data, we can __generate files for any programming language or framework__.   .... This page will show you the idea and possibilities through hof's ad-hoc code gen feature.

(That last sentence needs some work)

Author: updated 🔨

Reviewer: this paragraph changed a lot more than I expected from my previous comment

---
title: "Code Generation"
linkTitle: "Code Gen"
description: "Render any file from data and templates."
brief: "Render any file from data and templates."
keywords:
  - code generation 
  - code gen 
  - generate files
  - cue
  - yaml
  - JSON
  - generators
  - template-based
  - ad-hoc template rendering
  - modules
weight: 10
---

> {{<lead>}}

Reviewer: What does this `lead` look like? I suspect it is not rendering correctly

Author: that {{<lead>}} was already in the docs 🔨 

screenshot below

<img width="1191" alt="Captura de ecrã 2023-03-20, às 20 47 15" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/29093946/226462117-ceeb8a05-e76c-4eb6-8a57-4d48fc3c349d.png">

Reviewer: This text does not match what is between the `{{ lead }}` tags

Code generation is central to `hof`.

`hof`'s ad-hoc code generation feature enables developers to __generate files for any programming language or framework__ by rendering templates with data, saving developers valuable time and effort. This page showcases the idea and possibilities of code generation through `hof`.

{{</lead>}}

With `hof gen`, you can provide CUE, Yaml, or JSON arguments, which are then combined with templates to generate files and directories of code automatically.

Using flags and configurations, which we call generators, gives you complete control over the file generation process, quickly creating files tailored to your specific needs.

{{<codeInner lang="sh">}}
hof gen <cue, data, config>... [--flags...]
{{</codeInner>}}

> In template-based code generation, two approaches dominate: ad-hoc and a more sophisticated configuration or module-based method.

Reviewer: I don't think "dominate" is a great word here

Should we add a few words about ad-hoc at all?

Author: couple suggestions

- Ad-hoc-based code generation can be carried out in either of two main modes.
- Two primary modes exist for generating code using ad-hoc methods.
- Ad-hoc code generation can be accomplished in one of two primary ways.
- There are two primary approaches to ad-hoc-based code generation.
- Generating code with ad-hoc methods can be done in either of two main modes.

i've added a copy about the ad-hoc due to [this](https://github.com/hofstadter-io/hof/pull/162/files#r1139214102) comment 🔨

Reviewer: There are two methods for code gen

1. ad-hoc
2. config

not two methods of ad-hoc

we have more words for the second method, so expanding on the first seems prudent

1. `hof gen -T` is code gen from flags
2. `hof gen -G` is code gen from config

In this section, we will explore `hof gen -T`. Additionally, we will provide a step-by-step guide on creating a generator using the `-G` flag, as demonstrated in the [first example](/first-example/). 

> The [getting-started/create] section will also introduce `hof create`, which enables running generators directly from git repositories.

Reviewer: missing link URL here

Each of these methods utilizes the same core concepts and processes, and they are suitable for different use cases:

- `hof gen -T` is ideal for simple scenarios or when no dependencies are involved.
- `hof gen -G` is designed for creating reusable and shareable modules that may have dependencies.

> - `hof create` - is intended for interactive one-time interactive setup and bootstrapping.

Reviewer: interactive is used twice in this sentence, maybe we can remove both instances, not sure it is important to highlight the interactive feature of create at this point

there is an extra hyphen too

There are two main modes for
template-based code generation.

> 1. `hof gen -T` is code gen from flags

Reviewer: ... is _adhoc_ code gen ...

... is _something_ code gen...

what do you think?

Author: couple suggestions

- Ad-hoc-based code generation can be carried out in either of two main modes.
- Two primary modes exist for generating code using ad-hoc methods.
- Ad-hoc code generation can be accomplished in one of two primary ways.
- There are two primary approaches to ad-hoc-based code generation.
- Generating code with ad-hoc methods can be done in either of two main modes.

Reviewer: The location of this comment may have confused things... the change above is fine.

I'm thinking about the right-hand side of the 1. & 2. bullets, and wordsmithing the part after the is...

The two methods are ad hoc and _something_, no thinking of a good word to fill in that _something_, which is the config / re-generate-able / module based code gen (for when things get bigger or more complex)

I may be over thinking this 🤔

Author: In template-based code generation, two approaches dominate: ad-hoc and a more sophisticated configuration or module-based method.

what do you think?

2. `hof gen -G` is code gen from config

We will look at `hof gen -T` in this section.
The [first example](/first-example/) is a walkthrough
in writing a generator (the `-G` flag).

> The [getting-started/create](https://docs.hofstadter.io/getting-started/create/) section will introduce

Reviewer: we do not want absolute links, then it doesn't work locally or on next

so just the `/getting-started/create/` in the parens

Author: got it, will revert! thought was missing the rest of the hyperlink 🔨

> The [getting-started/create](https://docs.hofstadter.io/getting-started/create/) section will introduce

Author: ```suggestion
The [getting-started/create] section will introduce
```

## Data + Templates

> `hof gen interlude.json -T interlude.template` is ad-hoc template rendering.

Reviewer: should my _adhoc_ be _ad-hoc_ in all the places?

or maybe no hyphen either?

https://www.quora.com/Is-it-adhoc-or-ad-hoc-or-ad-hoc-Which-is-correct

Author: "Ad hoc" translates to "for this" or "for this intent." In technical contexts, it is generally used as an adjective to convey something done for a specific and frequently immediate objective, such as a temporary fix or a quick solution.

We also see "adhoc" spelled without the hyphen, but "ad-hoc" is the more common and formal spelling. In engineering and other technical writing, it's usually better to use the hyphenated form because it's more widely known. However, both are grammatically correct.

We can decide in one of them and apply it overall.

Reviewer: let's use the hyphenated version, it also stands out more visually

Author: sounds good 🔨

## Data + Templates

`hof gen interlude.json -T interlude.template` is ad-hoc template rendering.
Combine any data source with any template.

{{<codePane3
  title1="interlude.json" file1="code/getting-started/code-generation/interlude.json" lang1="json"
  title2= "interlude.template" file2= "code/getting-started/code-generation/interlude.template" lang2= "txt"
  title3="> terminal" file3="code/getting-started/code-generation/interlude.txt" lang3="txt"
>}}

#### `hof`'s templates are built on Go's `text/template` package with [extra helpers](/code-generation/template-writing/) added.

<br>

> You can also pipe any data into `hof gen` by using a" `-`" (hyphen).

Author: ```suggestion
You can also pipe any data into `hof gen` by using a "`-`" (hyphen).
```

### Writing to file

Use  `=` (equal) after the template name to write to the file.

{{<codeInner title="> terminal" lang="sh">}}
$ hof gen data.cue schema.cue -T template.txt=output.txt
{{</codeInner>}}

> Use `-O' to write all outputs to a directory.

Author: ```suggestion
Use `-O` to write all outputs to a directory.
```

### Writing to file

> Use  `=` (equal) after the template name to write to the file.

Reviewer: a file?

> Use  `=` (equal) after the template name to write to the file.

Author: ```suggestion
Use  `=` (equal) after the template name to write to a file.
```

### Writing to file

> The equal sign (`=`) is used to write to a file after the template name.

Reviewer: this is a little confusing, I read this after as a temporal relation, but we want to communicate spacial.

i.e. the file name comes after the equal sign

> The equal sign (`=`) is used to write to a file after the template name.

Author: ```suggestion
Use  `=` (equal) after the template name to write to file.
```

$ hof gen data.cue schema.cue -T template.txt -O out/
{{</codeInner>}}

> The output name can be a template so that you can control the filename from the data.

Reviewer: an inline template

> The output name can be a template so that you can control the filename from the data.

Author: ```suggestion
The output name can be an inline template so that you can control the filename from the data.
```

### Multiple Templates

> You can use the `-T` flag as often as you want.

Reviewer: You can use the `-T` flag _multiple times_.

> You can use the `-T` flag as often as you want.

Author: ```suggestion
You can use the `-T` flag multiple times.
```

### Watching for Changes

Use `-w`/`--watch` to observe for changes and re-render output.

{{<codeInner title="> terminal" lang="sh">}}
$ hof gen data.cue schema.cue -T template.txt -T debug.yaml -O out/ --watch
{{</codeInner>}}

> There are extra watch flags if automatic detection doesn't entirely work.

Reviewer: doesn't entirely work -> misses files?

> There are extra watch flags if automatic detection doesn't entirely work.

Author: ```suggestion
There are extra watch flags if automatic detection misses files.
```

## On Using CUE

<br>

> `hof`'s inputs are `cue`'s inputs, or "CUE entry points".

Reviewer: this space is going to be needed in a lot of places... :/

Author: I can bulk edit from entrypoints to entry points 🔨

The inputs hold CUE values, which can be intermixed with your data to
apply schemas, enrich the data, or transform before rendering.
When running commands, the CUE entry points are combined into one considerable CUE value.
The final data passed to a template must be concrete or fully specified.
This means the value needs to be like JSON data before template rendering accepts them.
As you will see, `hof` provides you flexibility and control
for how the CUE values are selected, combined, and mapped to templates.

> We keep parity with `cue` so tooling on the broader ecosystem

Reviewer: on -> from?

Author: If the intention is to say that we are keeping the input format compatible with cue, in order to ensure that tools from the broader ecosystem can still work on their inputs, then the first sentence is more appropriate. - `from` 

If the intention is to say that the input format is already compatible with the broader ecosystem, then the second sentence seems to be more appropriate. - `on`

Author: i've updated to `from` 🔨

> We keep parity with `cue` so tooling on the broader ecosystem

Author: ```suggestion
We keep parity with `cue` so tooling from the broader ecosystem
```

### Watching for Changes

> To observe for changes and re-render output, use the -`w/--watch` flag.

Reviewer: _To observe for_ sounds weird to me. Any objection to going back to observe -> watch?

Let'a add a sentence after, like "think of this like a live-reload you find in other tools"

Author: ```suggestion
Use the -`w/--watch` flag to watch for changes and re-render output. Think of the '-w/--watch' flag as a live-reload option that monitors your code and automatically re-renders your output when changes are detected.
```

Author: Use the -`w/--watch` flag to watch for changes and re-render output. Think of the `-w/--watch` flag as a live-reload option that monitors your code and automatically re-renders your output when changes are detected.

other suggestions for the second sentence
- The '-w/--watch' flag functions like a live-reload tool that provides real-time updates to your output as you change your code.
- Using the '-w/--watch' flag is like having a live-reload feature that constantly updates your output whenever a change is made to your code.
- Using the '-w/--watch' flag is like having a live-reload tool that continuously monitors your code and instantly refreshes your output when updates are made.
- The '-w/--watch' flag functions like a live-reload tool that provides real-time updates to your output as you change your code.

> Use the -`w/--watch` flag to watch for changes and re-render output. Think of the '-w/--watch' flag as a live-reload option that monitors your code and automatically re-renders your output when changes are detected.

Author: ```suggestion
Use the -`w/--watch` flag to watch for changes and re-render output. Think of the `-w/--watch` flag as a live-reload option that monitors your code and automatically re-renders your output when changes are detected.
```

#### Schema & Data

{{<codePane2

>   title1= "schema.cue" file1= "code/getting-started/code-generation/schema.html"

Reviewer: what's up with the spaces between the = and the arg? Is that something your IDE did?

Author: Seems so. In localhost didn't break anything. I use Vscode. Should I revert the spacings?

Reviewer: I'm not overly picky on this. The main driver for me here is to reduce toil from different IDEs "formatting" the others spacing. We don't want to see these keep going back and forth in different commits by different people, it's just noise at that point.

Don't worry about changing these spacing things yet. I want to pull the code and look at it in my IDE (vim). I doubt it will revert your spaces. The other alternative is to adjust the VSCode config, but that can be a rabbit hole, so don't for now.

Use `:<path>` to select a value and `@<path>` to apply a schema

We can remove the `.Input` from our templates and
pick the data and schema with flags. This approach can be helpful when we don't have control over the input data or if it comes in a data format.

{{<codePane2
  title1= "types.go" file1= "code/getting-started/code-generation/typesInput.go" lang1= "go"
  title2="> terminal" file2= "code/getting-started/code-generation/out/typesInput.go" lang2= "text"
>}}

### Partial Templates

Partial templates are fragments
that are used in other templates.
Unlike regular templates, these do not map to an output file. You can capture repeated sections

> like the fields to a struct or the arguments to a function.

Reviewer: "of" a struct

> like the fields to a struct or the arguments to a function.

Author: ```suggestion
like the fields of a struct or the arguments to a function.
```

Additionally, partials can invoke other partials, which is helpful for modularizing templates into logical components.

There are two ways to define and use partial templates:

- Use the `{{ define "name" }}` syntax in a regular template
- User the `-P` to load them from a file

For example, we _could_ extract the generation of fields into its template. We won't here, but as an example could include complex tasks like struct tags for Go fields. 

{{<codeInner title="> terminal" lang="sh">}}
$ hof gen data.cue schema.cue -P field.go -T types.go -O out/
{{</codeInner>}}

{{<codePane3
  title1="types.go" file1="code/getting-started/code-generation/typeP.go" lang1="go"
  title2= "field.go" file2= "code/getting-started/code-generation/field.go" lang2= "go"
  title3= "out/types.go" file3= "code/getting-started/code-generation/out/types.go" lang3= "text"
>}}

### Repeated Templates

> In addition to looping over data and applying a template fragment, as mentioned in the previous example, you can use __repeated templates__ to write a file for each element in an iterable such as a list or struct field. 

Reviewer: ~as mentioned in the previous example,~

> In addition to looping over data and applying a template fragment, as mentioned in the previous example, you can use __repeated templates__ to write a file for each element in an iterable such as a list or struct field. 

Author: In addition to looping over data and applying a template fragment, you can use __repeated templates__ to write a file for each element in an iterable such as a list or struct field.

> In addition to looping over data and applying a template fragment, as mentioned in the previous example, you can use __repeated templates__ to write a file for each element in an iterable such as a list or struct field. 

Author: ```suggestion
In addition to looping over data and applying a template fragment, you can use __repeated templates__ to write a file for each element in an iterable such as a list or struct field. 
```

- Use the `{{ define "name" }}` syntax in a regular template
- User the `-P` to load them from a file

Let's extract field generation into its template, where we _could_ make it complex.
We won't here, but an example is struct tags for our Go fields.
We can also use template helpers in the output file path.

{{<codeInner title="> terminal" lang="sh">}}
$ hof gen data.cue schema.cue -P field.go -T types.go -O out/
{{</codeInner>}}

{{<codePane3

>   title1="types.go" file1="code/getting-started/code-generation/typeP.go" lang1="go"

Reviewer: same questions about = space here, but it is inconsistent

generally, I'd like to not have the space, it is weird that is only on one side of the = too

  title2= "field.go" file2= "code/getting-started/code-generation/field.go" lang2= "go"
  title3= "out/types.go" file3= "code/getting-started/code-generation/out/types.go" lang3= "text"
>}}

### Repeated Templates

We just saw how to loop over data and apply a template fragment.

> We can also render with __repeated templates__, which are processed

Author: ```suggestion
We can also render with repeated templates, which will write a file
for each element of an iterable (list or struct fields).
```

> We can also render with repeated templates, which will write a file

Author: ```suggestion
We can also render with __repeated templates__, which will write a file
```

for each element of an iterable (list or struct fields)

> and write a file for each component.

Reviewer: We can also render with __repeated templates__, which will write a file
for each element of an iterable (list or struct fields).

?

> and write a file for each component.

Author: ```suggestion
```

- Use the `{{ define "name" }}` syntax in a regular template
- User the `-P` to load them from a file

Let's extract field generation into its template, where we _could_ make it complex.
We won't here, but an example is struct tags for our Go fields.
We can also use template helpers in the output file path.

{{<codeInner title="> terminal" lang="sh">}}
$ hof gen data.cue schema.cue -P field.go -T types.go -O out/
{{</codeInner>}}

{{<codePane3
  title1="types.go" file1="code/getting-started/code-generation/typeP.go" lang1="go"
  title2= "field.go" file2= "code/getting-started/code-generation/field.go" lang2= "go"
  title3= "out/types.go" file3= "code/getting-started/code-generation/out/types.go" lang3= "text"
>}}

### Repeated Templates

We just saw how to loop over data and apply a template fragment.
We can also render with repeated templates, which will write a file
for each element of an iterable (list or struct fields).

> for each element of an iterable (list or struct fields)

Author: ```suggestion
```

## What are Generators and Modules

> Generators are configurations for the `hof gen` flag, typically defined in CUE modules or Git repositories. 

Reviewer: Generators are file based configuration for `hof gen` that is equivalent to setting flags. These are typically packaged as a CUE module in a Git repository, but can also exist within your current project if you do not want to share or reuse them.

Something like this...

Author: couple suggestions

- Generators are file-based tools that provide a configuration option for `hof gen`, similar to setting flags. These can be stored in a CUE module in a Git repository, or you can create them within your project for personal use.

- With generators, you can configure `hof gen` through file-based options equivalent to setting flags. These generators are often packaged as a CUE module in a Git repository, or you can create them within your project for private use.

- To configure `hof gen`, you can use generators, which are file-based alternatives to set flags. These generators are commonly found as a CUE module in a Git repository, but you can also create them within your project to keep them confidential.

> ## What are Generators and Modules

Reviewer: we may revisit this section later, when working on the `hof mod` documentation revamp
